---
layout: post
title:  "Learning C: Bitten by Strings"
date: 2025-02-03 12:00:00 +0000
categories:
---
# Learning C: Bitten by Strings
TLDR: In C, string literals *aren't* just pointers, *aren't* just arrays, and they *aren't* even necessarily strings.

The first thing anybody tells you before they try to teach you C is that it's full of pitfalls, some more obvious than others. The first thing they will tell you when they try to teach you about strings in C is that "a string is just a null-terminated array of characters," smoothing over the ways in which this is *not* the case. Fine, maybe I'm being unfair -- the second thing they might tell you about strings is that in C they are particularly hairy for all sorts of other reasons. But nobody has the attention span to learn about all the reasons this is true in one sitting; much ink can be spilled before the word `wchar_t` is even mentioned, not that it matters in this case. The mistake outlined in this post is completely my fault, but also, I think, illustrative of an important way in which the received wisdom about various types in C being "just pointers" is wrong.

In the interest of broadening my knowledge of computers, I've been doing some self-directed learning about C. Here's an issue that I ran into while trying to write a function involving strings. A minimal reproducible example might look something like the following function, which takes a string `s` as an input, replaces all instances of the character `old` in `s` with `new` and returns the number of characters replaced.

```C
int replace(char *s, char old, char new)
{
    int n = 0;
    while (*s)
    {
        if (*s == old)
        {
            *s = new;
            n++;
        }  
        s++;
    }
    return n;
}
```

To my novice eye, this code looks like typical C. The function is intended to be used on a string, but, because of the rules of C's type system, the caller of `replace` could -- to potentially disastrous effect -- pass any of the following as the `s` parameter:

1. A null pointer.
2. A string literal.
3. A variable naming a string literal.
4. A pointer to an array of `char`s.
5. A pointer to a `char`.
6. Probably other things too.
   
Of course, every function in C rests on unstated assumptions that many newer languages would require the programmer to explicitly guard against. When writing the functions, here are the assumptions I was aware of making:

1. `s` is a valid null-terminated string.
2. The text of `s` is representable by a single-byte character set encoding.
3. `new` is not `\0`.
4. `s` is not accessed by any other threads for the duration of the function.
   
If these three assumptions hold, I thought, everything should be fine.

```C
int main(void)
{
    char *str = "some string";
    int n = replace(str, 's', 'S');
    printf("%d chars replaced in: %s\n", n, str);
}
```

Of course, everything was not fine.

```
AddressSanitizer:DEADLYSIGNAL
=================================================================
==19249==ERROR: AddressSanitizer: SEGV on unknown address 0x0000004020e0 (pc 0x0000004017dd bp 0x7fff1ee1e2a0 sp 0x7fff1ee1e1f0 T0)
==19249==The signal is caused by a WRITE memory access.
```

Anybody better at C than me will probably have noticed instantly that the function `replace` should not be used on string literals (or variables naming string literals) *at all*. Indeed, the only valid inputs for the `s` parameter are null-terminated `char` arrays *that are not string literals*. This is true despite the fact that such an array decays to a pointer that is indistinguishable by the callee from a pointer to a string literal. 

To quote K&R, "Whether identical string literals are distinct is implementation-defined, and the behavior of a program that attempts to alter a string literal is undefined." In all fairness to myself, the sentence **immediately** preceding that one is: "A string has type `array of characters` and storage class `static` ... and is initialized with the given characters." 🤪

The reason I point out that sentence is that the fix to the problem in my program is to explicitly declare the variable `str` as an array, rather than a `char *`. Even declaring `str` as an array of characters with the storage class `static` is enough to avoid the segfault. Clearly, I've missed something about the differences between a string and a string literal - concepts that are indistinct in the languages I've learned so far.

```C
    /* this works */
    char str0[] = "some string";
    replace(str0, 's', 'S');
    /* this works too */
    static char str1[] = "some string";
    replace(str1, 's', 'S');
```

It turns out that strings and string literals in C are two subtly different concepts. Per the C23 spec, "A string is a contiguous sequence of characters terminated by and including the first null character." Meanwhile, the spec defines a character string literal as "a sequence of zero or more multibyte characters enclosed in double-quotes." In an easy-to-miss footnote, it clarifies: "A string literal may not be a string (see 7.1.1), because a null character can be embedded in it by a `\0` escape sequence."

A string literal, it would seem, is a data type that sits awkwardly between C source code and the compiler's output. During compilation, the compiler takes a string literal from the source code, appends a null byte to it, and stores it somewhere in the output. To save memory, two or more equivalent string literals from the source code may be combined into a single object in the output. The string literal object *is* stored as an array, but its semantics differ from arrays that are declared by other means. In particular, writing to an array that is also a string literal is undefined behavior.

To muddy the waters further, a `char` array can be initialized to the value of a string literal without itself being a string literal.

```C
    char str_0[] = "some string";
    char *str_1 = "some string";

```

In the foregoing example, `str_0` is the name for an array initialized to the value of a string literal (i.e. "some string"). The value of `str_0` is defined only when it comes into scope. That is, the string literal "some string" is likely stored as a distinct object and its representation in memory is copied to `str_0` each time `str_0` is initialized. `str_1` is the name for a pointer to the first character of the instantiation of the string literal "some string". Both `str_0` and `str_1` are technically strings. Modifying the data named by `str_0` is fine. Modifying the data pointed to by the pointer named by `str_1` is undefined behavior. All of this information is invisible from the perspective of any function that operates on either `str_0` or `str_1`. That's a little frightening to me.

One last thing... it occurs to me now, only after writing all this, that I might avoid this very problem in the future if I make sure to declare all strings that I definitely do not want to modify as `const char *` and declare all other strings as `char` arrays. That way, if I pass the `-Werror=discarded-qualifiers` flag to GCC, I'll at least get a compilation error. Sigh. I'll chalk this up as a lesson (hopefully) learned the hard way.
